# cargo2nix

[Nixify](https://nixos.org/nix) your Rust projects today with `cargo2nix`,
bringing you reproducible builds and better caching.

This repository hosts two components:

- A [Nixpkgs](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs) overlay, located at the `/overlay`
  directory, providing utilities to build your Cargo workspace and set up
  airplane mode.
  
- A utility written in Rust to generate version pins of crate dependencies.
  
Together, these components will take an existing `Cargo.lock` and delegate the
process of fetching and combining your dependencies (generated by Cargo) using
the deterministic Nix package manager.

## Build instructions

1. Install the [Nix package manager](https://nixos.org/nix) on your *nix
   machine.
2. Run the command below to build the `cargo2nix` utility:

```bash
# For Linux users
nix-build -A package

# For macOS/Darwin users
nix-build -A package --arg crossSystem null
```

## How to use this for your Rust projects

### As a build system

1. Generate version pins to `Cargo.nix` by running `cargo2nix > Cargo.nix` at
   the root of your cargo workspace.

2. Use `default.nix` in this repository as an example, select the package you
   want to build and set up required build-time/run-time dependencies.

### Optional declarative development shell

You can optionally use any of these crate derivation as your `nix-shell`
development shell. The advantage of this shell is that in this environment users
can develop their crates and be sure that their crates builds in the same way
that `cargo2nix` overlay will build them.

To do this, run `nix-shell -A 'rustPkgs.<registry>.<crate>."x.y.z"' default.nix`.
For instance, the following command being invoked in this repository root drops
you into such a development shell.

```bash
# When a crate is not associated with any registry, such as when building locally,
# the registry is "unknown" as shown below.
nix-shell -A 'rustPkgs.unknown.cargo2nix."0.5.0"' default.nix
```

You will need to bootstrap some environment in this declarative development
shell first.

```bash
runHook configureCargo  # This overrides your .cargo folder, e.g. for setting cross-compilers
runHook setBuildEnv     # This sets up linker flags for the `rustc` invocations
```

You will need to override your `Cargo.toml` and `Cargo.lock` in this shell,
so make sure that you have them backed up beforehand.

```bash
runHook overrideCargoManifest
```

Now you can use your favorite editor in this environment. To run the build
command used by `cargo2nix`, use

```bash
runHook runCargo
```

### Airplane mode

Note: This functionality is currently not working in version 0.4. Revert back to
[version 0.3](https://github.com/tenx-tech/cargo2nix/tree/0b14c7efe1a35986c07f9624b76ae5f2a8c67ec0)
if you need it.

Going flying next morning and planning to code Rust to kill your boredom for the
next 12 hours? Airplane mode allows you to work offline as long as you have
checked in the `crates-io` dependencies into Nix store. The `shell` derivation
in `default.nix` is a sample derivation that enables airplane mode for your
`cargo`.

To enter airplane mode, run the following command.

```bash
nix-shell -A shell --fallback --option substitute false
```

Then execute `vendor_source` command in the shell to install source replacement
for the `crates-io` public crates.

## Common issues

1. Many `crates.io` public crates may not build using the current Rust compiler,
   unless a lint cap is put on these crates. For instance, `cargo2nix` caps all
   warnings in the `failure` crate to just `warn`.

## Design

This Nixpkgs overlay builds your Rust crates and binaries by first pulling the
dependencies apart, building them individually as separate Nix derivations and
linking them together. This is achieved by basically passing linker flags to the
`cargo` invocations and the underlying `rustc`/`rustdoc` invocations.

The overlay is built on top of the work by James Kay. In addition, this overlay
also takes cross-compilation into account and build the crates onto the correct
host platform configurations with the correct platform-dependent feature flags
specified in the Cargo manifests and build-time dependencies.

## Credits

This Nix overlay is inspired by the excellent work done by James Kay, which
is described
[here](https://www.hadean.com/blog/managing-rust-dependencies-with-nix-part-i)
and
[here](https://www.hadean.com/blog/managing-rust-dependencies-with-nix-part-ii).
His source is available [here](https://github.com/Twey/mkRustCrate).
This work is impossible without these fantastic write-ups.
Special thanks to James Kay!

## License

`cargo2nix` is free and open source software distributed under the terms of the
[MIT License](./LICENSE).
